@comment AIPS++ Implementation Memo Series
@comment
@comment This file lists the available memos. It has some texinfo
@comment formatting embedded within it so it may be automatically
@comment included in texinfo documentation (in particular, the 
@comment Project Book).

@enumerate 101

@comment 101
@item
@i{Introduction to the Memos and Notes}
@* 1992/03    Glendenning.
@* Under construction.

@comment 102
@item
@i{An Initial Designn for Major @sc{aips++} Objects}
@* 1992/01/31 Hjellming, Glendenning. 
@* An incomplete note that set context for the Green Bank meeting. 
   Has two figures unavailable in the electronic version.

@comment 103
@item
@i{Calibration, Imaging, and Datasystems for @sc{aips++} - Report of the
   meeting held at Green Bank, West Virginia, 3rd-14th February, 1992}
@* 1992/02/18 Shone, Cornwell (Eds).
@* Has several figures and many pages of text that are only available in
   paper, but the important expository text is available electronically.

@comment 104
@item
@i{@sc{aips++} prototype}
@* 1992/03/20 Olnon (Ed).
@* Report on a small prototype the development group undertook.
   Two figures are only available in paper.

@comment 105
@item
@i{Tentative Proposal for an @sc{aips++} Project Book}
@* 1992/04/09 Hjellming, Glendenning.

@comment 106
@item
@i{AIPS++ Familiarization}
@* 1992/09/02, 1992/10/06 Hjellming, Glendenning.
@* Recommendations for learning about, and programming in, AIPS++.

@comment 107
@item
@i{Spherical Map Projections}
@* 1992/10/27 Calabretta.
@* Concise mathematical description of spherical map projections for use in
   astronomy.

@comment 108
@item
@i{AIPS++ Software Design: Telescope Data Handling}
@* 1993/04/26 Bottomly.
@* Software design document for handling instrument data input using
   Rumbaugh methodology.

@comment 109
@item
@i{An Overview of AIPS++ Design}
@* 1993/05/08 Hjellming, Glendenning.
@* Overview document on AIPS++ covering the status of class design as of
   April, 1993.

@comment 110
@item
@i{AIPS++ Mission Statement}
@* 1993/09/03 Hunt (Ed)
@* AIPS++ Mission Statement.  Adopted by the AIPS++ steering committee
   16th October, 1993.

@comment 111
@item
@i{The Design of AIPS++}
@* 1995/02/17 Glendenning.
@* Written (and only very slightly modified) for the AIPS++ review of
   December 1994.

@comment 112
@item
@i{AIPS++ Review: Report of the Review Panel}
@* 1994/12/15 Offen et al.
@* The findings and recommendations of the review panel.

@end enumerate
